---
title: Moduli spaces, classifying spaces, and characteristic classes
comments: 34
---

{% include post-header.md %}


(07 Mar 2023) In this post, I will work through the moduli spaces notes posted [here](https://web.ma.utexas.edu/users/benzvi/math/pcm0178.pdf) and add some commentary from other places here and there.



## Brief homology review

I will *very roughly* review homology and cohomology in this subsection. I will be a bit heuristic, possibly switching between the simplicial and singular versions. Note that I will be considering homology with integer coefficients, and so $H_i(X)$ will always denote $H_i(X; \mathbb Z)$.

Consider a triangle $X$ with vertices $a, b, c$ and directed edges $e = a \to b, f = b \to c, g = c\to a$. Define the chain groups $C_i$. Namely, $C_i = \{0\}$ for $i > 1$ and $i < 0$, $C_1 = \textrm{Free}(\{e,f,g\})$, and $C_0 = \textrm{Free}(\{a,b,c \})$, where here Free denotes the free abelian group generated by $S$. Hence, $C_1 = \{n_e e + n_f f + n_g g \mid n_e, n_f, n_g \in \mathbb Z \}$ and $C_0 = \{n_a a + n_b b + n_c c \mid n_a,n_b,n_c \in \mathbb Z \}$. In the free group, we think of the formal inverses $e^{-1}, f^{-1}, g^{-1}$ as the edges $e,f,g$ directed in the opposite direction. In the free abelian group, we similarly think of the inverses $-e, -f, -g$. 

Define the boundary maps which are homomorphisms $\partial_i \colon C_i \to C_{i-1}$, or $\partial_i \in H(C_i, C_{i-1})$. Obviously $\partial_0 = \partial_i = 0$ for all $i > 1$. For $i=1$, $\partial_1$ gives us the oriented boundary of $1$-chains (elements of $C_1$). Since its a homomorphism, if suffices to define $\partial_1 e, \partial_1 f, \partial_1 g$. We define these as

$$
\begin{aligned}
\partial_1 e &= b - a\\
\partial_1 f &= c - b\\
\partial_1 g &= a - c.
\end{aligned}
$$

The crucial property satisfied by the boundary maps is $\partial_i \circ \partial_{i+1} = 0$ for all $i$, meaning that the image $\text{Im}(\partial_{i+1})$ is a normal subgroup of the kernel $\text{Ker}(\partial_i)$. The $i^{\rm th}$ homology group is $H_i(X) = \text{Ker}(\partial_i) / \text{Im}(\partial_{i+1})$. 

In our case for examle, one can check by explicit calculation that

$$
\begin{aligned}
\text{Im}(\partial_1) &= \{n_1 a + n_2 b - (n_1 + n_2) c \mid n_1, n_2 \in \mathbb Z \} \cong \mathbb Z \oplus \mathbb Z \\
\text{Ker}(\partial_1) &= \{n (e+f+g) \mid n \in \mathbb Z \}\cong \mathbb Z\\
\text{Im}(\partial_2) &= 0.
\end{aligned}
$$

Therefore, $H_1(X) = \mathbb Z / \{0\} = \mathbb Z$.

We will denote loops in $X$ by $Z_i(X) = \text{Ker}(\partial_i)$, and boundaries in $X$ by $B_i(X) = \text{Im}(\partial_{i+1})$.


## Brief cohomology review

We now define cochain $C^i$ as the dual of the chain $C_i$, $C^i = C_i^\ast = \text{Hom}(C_i, G)$ for a group $G$. The coboundary map is the natural dual map (similar to e.g. the transpose map in linear algebra) $\delta^i \coloneqq \partial_{i+1}^\ast$; i.e. $\delta^i\in \text{Hom}(C^i, C^{i+1})$ acting as $h \mapsto h \circ \partial_{i+1}$. The $i^{\rm th}$ cohomology group is then $H^i(X; G) \coloneqq \text{Ker}(\delta^i) / \text{Im}(\delta^{i-1})$. This works again because of the crucial property $\delta^{i+1} \circ \delta^i = 0$, which follows from $\partial_i \circ \partial_{i+1} = 0$.

We now note a fact that will be useful later on; $H^1(X; G) \cong \text{Hom}(H_1(X), G)$. Note that this is *not* true for general $i$. It's only true for $i=1$. This fact follows from the universal coefficient theorem for cohomology, which states that (see e.g. Hatcher)

$$
0 \to \text{Ext}(H_{i-1}(X), G) \to H^i(X; G) \to \text{Hom}(H_i(X), G) \to 0
$$

is split exact, and Ext satisfies that $\text{Ext}(A, G) = 0$ whenever $A$ is free. Since $H_0(X) \cong \mathbb Z^{\rm num connected components}$ (see e.g. Nakahara, cor 3.1), $H_0(X)$ is always free, so that $H^1(X; G) \to \text{Hom}(H_1(X), G)$ is an isomorphism.


## Moduli space of lines in the plane

Throughout the rest of this post, "lines" will mean "lines through the origin in $\mathbb R^2$". With that being said, let $\mathbb{RP}^1$ denote the set of all lines. For a line $L$, let $\theta(L)$ be the angle between $L$ and the $x$-axis. Clearly, as a set $\mathbb{RP}^1 \cong [0,\pi)$. However, there is a natural notion of when two lines are "close" that this bijective mapping does not capture. As a topological space, we say $\mathbb{RP}^1 = [0,\pi] / \sim$ with the quotient topology, where $x \sim x + \pi$. More naturally, to each point $s \in S^1 \subset \mathbb R^2$, we assign the line $L(s)$ defined by the origin and the point $s$. $L\colon S^1 \to \mathbb{RP}^1$ is continuous, and we have that $\mathbb{RP}^1 = S^1 / \{\pm 1\}$ as a topological manifold.

Finally, we can put a natural smooth structure on $\mathbb{RP}^1$. One can use the quotient manifold theorem, since $\{\pm 1\}$ acts freely, properly, and smoothly on $S^1$. For this simple case, though, we can also just work out the coordinate charts. Let $\theta$ be as before and $\phi(L)$ be the angle between $L$ and the $y$-axis. Away from $\theta(L) = 0,\pi$ we have a coordinate chart $\theta \colon U \to U' \subset \mathbb R$ that is a homeomorphism. Away from $\phi(L) = 0,\pi$ we have a coordinate chart $\phi\colon V \to V' \subset \mathbb R$ that is a homeomorphism. One clearly finds that $\theta \circ \phi^{-1} \colon V' \to U'$ is differentiable.

$\mathbb{RP}^1$ with all its various structures is the moduli space of lines -- i.e. lines in the plane through the origin. It captures the way in which lines can modulate, or vary continuously/smoothly in families. For any continuous curve $C \subset \mathbb R^2 \setminus \{0\}$, $C \ni c\mapsto L(c)$. So this is a continuous parameterization. For example, a continuous 10-parameter family of lines is just a continuous map $\mathbb R^{10} \to \mathbb{RP}^1$, where in this case $\mathbb{RP}^1$ is considered only as a topological manifold. If one instead desired a smooth 10-parameter family of lines, this a smooth map $\mathbb R^{10} \to \mathbb{RP}^1$, where in this case $\mathbb{RP}^1$ is conisdered a smooth manifold. More generally, a continuous/smooth family of lines parameterized by a topological/smooth manifold $X$ is a continuous/smooth function $f\colon X \to \mathbb{RP}^1$. In the case of a smooth parameterization, this corresponds to the pullbacks $f^\ast \theta, f^\ast \phi$ being smooth.

Thus, depending on how you want to parameterize lines, you consider different structures on $\mathbb{RP}^1$ and consider maps from a parameter space to $\mathbb{RP}^1$. This is the sense in which $\mathbb{RP}^1$ is the moduli space of lines.



## Classifying spaces and line bundles

For the remainder of this post, let's forget about smooth structures and just consider topology. Moduli spaces in topology are often referred to as classifying spaces. Consider the tautological line bundle over $\mathbb{RP}^1$; that is, $\mathbb{RP}^1 \ni s \mapsto L(s) \subset \mathbb R^2$. For reference, one can quickly convince oneself that this is isomorphic to the mobius strip. Consider a continuous function $f\colon X \to \mathbb{RP}^1$. The pullback bundle $f^\ast L$ is a line bundle over $X$, $X \ni x \mapsto L(f(x)) \subset \mathbb R^2$. For two maps $f, g \colon X \to \mathbb{RP}^1$, $f^\ast L \cong g^\ast L$ if and only if $f$ and $g$ are homotopic (to do: understand this better; one direction is Nakahara theorem 9.1). 

Finally, for any line bundle $M\colon X \ni x \mapsto M(x) \subset \mathbb R^2$ that lives in the trivial $X \times \mathbb R^2$ vector bundle, there exists an $f\colon X \to \mathbb{RP}^1$ such that $M = f^\ast L$ (i.e. $f(x) = s$ such that $L(s) = M(x)$). 

Thus, the set of all homotopy classes of continuous functions is bijective to the set of all line bundles over $X$ that are contained in $X \times \mathbb R^2$. In other words, the map $[f] \mapsto f^\ast L$ is a bijection and the image is all line bundles over $X$ that are contained in $X\times \mathbb R^2$, where $[f]$ denotes the class of functions homotopic to $f$.

Therefore, **if we want to classify all line bundles over $X$ that are contained in $X \times \mathbb R^2$, we can equivalently classify all homotopy classes of function $X \to \mathbb{RP}^1$.**



## Characteristic classes; the Euler class

*Overview of this subsection*. We will show how to assign a topological invariant to a line bundle $M$ by assigning a topological invariant to a continuous map $\phi\colon X \to \mathbb{RP}^1$ corresponding to the line bundle, where this correspondence is the one described above. This invariant will be $\text{wind}_\phi \in H^1(X; \mathbb Z)$.


Consider a loop $f\colon S^1 \to X$; i.e. $f\in Z_1(X)$. Then $\phi\circ f\colon S^1 \to \mathbb{RP}^1$. Considering the isomorphism $\mathbb{RP}^1 \cong S^1$, $\phi\circ f\colon S^1 \to S^1$ has a winding number. But since $S^1$ is like a double cover of $\mathbb{RP}^1$, we'll define $\text{wind}_\phi(f)$ to be half the winding number of $\phi\circ f \colon S^1 \to S^1$. Thus, $\text{wind}_\phi \in \text{Hom}(Z_1(X), \mathbb Z)$. 

Suppose $g \in B_1(X)$ is a boundary $g\colon S^1 \to X$. Then there exists a $G\colon D^2 \to X$ such that $g = G\rvert_{\partial D^2}$, where $D^2$ is the disk so that $\partial D^2 = S^1$. Then, the winding number of $\phi \circ G\rvert_{\partial D^2}$ must be zero since $\phi\circ G\colon D^2 \to \mathbb{RP}^2$ is continuous. Hence, $\text{wind}_\phi(f+g) = \text{wind}_\phi(f)$, where here we are considering $f+g$ as the addition of loops. 

Therefore, 

$$\text{wind}_\phi \in \text{Hom}(Z_1(X)/B_1(X), \mathbb Z) = \text{Hom}(H_1(X), \mathbb Z) \cong H^1(X; \mathbb Z).$$

So, **to every line bundle on $X$ which is contained in the trivial $X\times \mathbb R^2$ bundle, we have associated a cohomology class, known as the Euler class of the bundle**.



## Generalization

I now switch to complex vector bundles, though the story is the same for real bundles. I summarize Nakahara section 11.2.4.

**Fact** *(see e.g. Hatcher p. 201 or Nakahara 6.4 for de Rham)*. If $f,g \colon (M, A) \to (N, B)$ are homotopic, then $f^\ast = g^\ast \colon H^r(N; B) \to H^r(M; A)$.

Let $\pi\colon E \to M$ be a vector bundle with fibre $\mathbb C^k$. We can always find a bundle $\bar E \to M$ such that $E \oplus \bar E \cong M \times \mathbb C^n$ for some $n\geq k$ (what's a good reference for this?). Let $L_{k, n}(\mathbb C)$ be the tautological bundle over the Grassmanian $G_{k, n}(\mathbb C)$ with fibre $\mathbb C^k$. Let $f \colon M \to G_{k, n}(\mathbb C)$.

**Theorem** *(Chern 1979)*. There exists a natural number $N$ such that for $n > N$:
- $\exists f\colon M \to G_{k, n}(\mathbb C)$ such that $E \cong f^\ast L_{k, n}(\mathbb C)$,
- $f^\ast L_{k, n}(\mathbb C) \cong g^\ast L_{k, n}(\mathbb C)$ if and only if $f,g\colon M \to G_{k, n}(\mathbb C)$ are homotopic.

Thus, classifying vector bundles is equivalent to classifying homotopy classes of maps $M \to G_{k, n}(\mathbb C)$. (Technically, we really should be going to $G_n(\mathbb C) = \bigcup_{n=k}^\infty G_{k, n}(\mathbb C)$ via $G_{k,k}\hookrightarrow G_{k,k+1} \hookrightarrow \dots \hookrightarrow G_k$.)

A characteristic class $\chi$ is a map $E \mapsto \chi(E)\in H^\ast(M)$ such that
- $\chi(E) = \chi(E')$ whenever $E \sim E'$ (for any notion of $\sim$ you like), and
- $\chi(g^\ast E) = g^\ast \chi(E)$ (naturality).

Suppose $\pi \colon E \to M$ is a rank $k$ vector bundle and $[f]$ is the homotopy class of maps $M \to G_{k,n}(\mathbb C)$ such that $E = f^\ast L_{k,n}(\mathbb C)$. Then $\chi(E) = \chi(f^\ast L_{k,n}) = f^\ast \chi(L_{k,n})$. **Thus, once we know $\chi$ of the universal bundle $L_{k,n}$ on the classifying space $G_{k,n}$, we can construct an invariant of a vector bundle $E = f^\ast L_{k, n}$.**
It is in this sense that $G_{k, n}$ is the classifying/moduli space of $\mathbb C^k$ vector bundles.


**Example** *(Chern class)*. The Chern class $c(E)$ is uniquely defined by the following axioms.
- $c(f^\ast E) = f^\ast c(E)$.
- $c(E) = c_0(E) \oplus c_1(E) \oplus \dots \oplus c_k(E)$, where $c_i(E) \in H^{2i}(M)$ and $c_i(E) = 0$ for $i > k$ (where $E$ is rank $k$).
- $c(E \oplus F) = c(E)c(F)$.
- $c(L) = 1 + x$ where $L$ is the tautological line bundle over $\mathbb{CP}^n$ ($x$ is a normalization).




## Relevance in physics

So why do these characteristic classes show up in physics? Consider Bloch states of a $j$ bands $\ket{u^j(\vec k)}$. The Brillouin zone is $M$. Fo each momentum $\vec k \in M$, we have a vector space $\text{span}\{\ket{u^i(\vec k)} \}$. Hence, we have a vector bundle $E \to M$. The associated principle bundle is a $U(j)$-bundle, which gives a $U(j)$ gauge theory. Gauge fields are then used to actually compute the characteristic classes (via the bijective correspondence between rank $j$ vector bundles and $\mathrm{U}(j)$-bundles; see e.g. [here](https://math.stackexchange.com/a/2302464/395731)). Indeed, the classification of principle bundles goes the same as the classification of vector bundles. Outside of band theory, we are generally interested in scalar/vector fields over spacetime $X$ and their associated $\mathrm{U}(n)$-bundles giving rise to gauge theory.

When a characteristic class of a vector bundle gives an element of the de Rham cohomology, that element can be integrated, ultimately giving rise to characteristic numbers.



{% include post-footer.html %}
