---
title: Principle ideal domains yield Noetherian modules
comments: 35
---

{% include post-header.md %}


(25 Apr 2023) The goal of this post is to understand why every finitely generated $R$-module is Noetherian when $R$ is a priniciple ideal domain. I use [these notes](https://kconrad.math.uconn.edu/blurbs/linmultialg/noetherianmod.pdf). First let’s define Noetherian.


**Definition 1.** *For $R$ a commutative ring, an $R$-module is called Noetherian if every submodule is finitely generated.*

And now the main theorem.

**Theorem 2.** *If $R$ is a principle ideal domain, then every finitely generated $R$-module is a Noetherian $R$-module.*

*Proof.* Suppose that $M$ is a finitely generated $R$-module, so that

$$
0 \xrightarrow{} \ker f \xrightarrow{\phi} R^k \xrightarrow{f} M \xrightarrow{} 0
$$

is exact, where $\phi, f$ are module homomorphisms. Therefore, $M \cong \operatorname{coker}(\phi) = R^k / \ker f$. By definition of a principle ideal domain, every ideal of $R$ is generated by a single element. Hence, when viewing $R$ as an $R$-module over itself, every submodule is finitely generated. Therefore, $R$ is a Noetherian $R$-module. By Lemma 5 below, a $k$-fold direct sum of a Noetherian module is again Noetherian. Hence, $R^k$ is Noetherian. Finally, by Lemma 3 below, every quotient module of a Noetherian module is again Noetherian. Since $f$ is a homomorphism, $\ker f$ is a module, and hence $R^k / \ker f$ is a quotient module of the Noetherian module $R^k$. It follows that $\operatorname{coker}(\phi) \cong M$ is a Noetherian module. {% include endproof.html %}


### Lemmas

**Lemma 3.** *Every quotient module $M / N$ of a Noetherian module $M$ is Noetherian.*

*Proof.* A submodule of $M/N$ is of the form $Q / N$, where $N \subseteq Q \subseteq M$. Since $M$ is Noetherian and $Q$ is a submodule of $M$, $Q$ is finitely generated. Suppose that $Q$ is generated by $q_1,\dots, q_r$. Then $Q / N$ is generated by $q_1+N, \dots, q_r+N$ and is thus finitely generated. Therefore, every submodule of $M/N$ is finitely generated, making it a Noetherian module. {% include endproof.html %}

**Lemma 4.** *Let $N$ be a submodule of $M$. $M$ is Noetherian if and only if $N$ and $M / N$ are Noetherian. In other words, let $A,B,C$ be modules with the exact sequence $0\to A\to B \to C \to 0$. Then $B$ is Noetherian if and only if $A$ and $C$ are Noetherian.*

*Proof.* First, we prove the forward direction. Assume that $M$ is Noetherian. Then Lemma 3 proves that $M/N$ is Noetherian. Furthermore, any submodule of $N$ is also a submodule of $M$, so that $N$ is also Noetherian.

Next, we prove the backward direction. Let $Q$ be a submodule of $M$. We need to prove that $Q$ is finitely generated assuming that $N$ and $M/N$ are Noetherian. Let the image of $Q$ in $M/N$ be generated by $q_1,\dots, q_r$. Furthermore, let the intersection $Q\cap N$ be geneated by $n_1,\dots,n_p$. Supposing that the image of $q \in Q$ in $M/N$ is $q = \sum_i a_i q_i$, then $q - \sum_i a_i q_i \in N$. Further, the latter is also in $Q$ since $q\in Q$ and we can think of each $q_i \in Q$ (and the images of $q_i$ generate $M/N$).  So, $q - \sum_i a_i q_i \in Q \cap N$ and is therefore equal to $\sum_j b_j n_j$ for some $b$. Therefore, any element $q\in Q$ can be expressed as the sum of two finite sums $\sum_i a_i q_i + \sum_j b_j n_j$, and hence $Q$ is finitely generated. {% include endproof.html %}

**Lemma 5**. *The direct sum $M_1 \oplus \dots \oplus M_k$ of Noetherian modules $M_i$ is Noetherian.*

*Proof.* We show that $M_1 \oplus M_2$ is Noetherian and then induct. Note that $(M_1 \oplus M_2) / (M_1 \oplus 0) \cong M_2$. Since $M_1, M_2$ are Noetherian, it follows from Lemma 4 that $M_1 \oplus M_2$ is Noetherian. In other words, we have the exact sequence $0\to M_1 \to M_1\oplus M_2 \to M_2 \to 0$, and therefore by Lemma 4, the left and right are Noetherian if and only if the middle is Noetherian. {% include endproof.html %}



{% include post-footer.html %}
